
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74527 ***





                          Idylls of the Bible


                                ...BY...

                          MRS. F. E. W. HARPER

                              PHILADELPHIA

                         1006 BAINBRIDGE STREET

                                  1901

[Illustration: Frances E. W. Harper]




                                 MOSES
                          A STORY OF THE NILE




                        THE PARTING.—CHAPTER I.


                     MOSES.

     Kind and gracious princess, more than friend,
     I’ve come to thank thee for thy goodness,
     And to breathe into thy generous ears
     My last and sad farewell. I go to join
     The fortunes of my race, and to put aside
     All other bright advantages, save
     The approval of my conscience and the meed
     Of rightly doing.


                     PRINCESS.

     What means, my son, this strange election?
     What wild chimera floats across thy mind?
     What sudden impulse moves thy soul? Thou who
     Hast only trod the court of kings, why seek
     Instead the paths of labor? Thou, whose limbs
     Have known no other garb than that which well
     Befits our kingly state, why rather choose
     The badge of servitude and toil?


                     MOSES.

     Let me tell thee, gracious princess; ’tis no
     Sudden freak nor impulse wild that moves my mind.
     I feel an earnest purpose binding all
     My soul unto a strong resolve, which bids
     Me put aside all other ends and aims,
     Until the hour shall come when God—the God
     Our fathers loved and worshipped—shall break our chains,
     And lead our willing feet to freedom.

                     PRINCESS.

     Listen to me, Moses: thou art young,
     And the warm blood of youth flushes thy veins
     Like generous wine; thou wearest thy manhood
     Like a crown; but what king e’er cast
     His diadem in the dust, to be trampled
     Down by every careless foot? Thou hast
     Bright dreams and glowing hopes; could’st thou not live
     Them out as well beneath the radiance
     Of our throne as in the shadow of those
     Bondage-darkened huts?


                     MOSES.

     Within those darkened huts my mother plies her tasks,
     My father bends to unrequited toil;
     And bitter tears moisten the bread my brethren eat.
     And when I gaze upon their cruel wrongs
     The very purple on my limbs seems drenched
     With blood, the warm blood of my own kindred race;
     And then thy richest viands pall upon my taste,
     And discord jars in every tone of song.
     I cannot live in pleasure while they faint
     In pain.


                     PRINCESS.

     How like a dream the past floats back: it seems
     But yesterday when I lay tossing upon
     My couch of pain, a torpor creeping through
     Each nerve, a fever coursing through my veins.
     And there I lay, dreaming of lilies fair,
     Of lotus flowers and past delights, and all
     The bright, glad hopes, that give to early life
     Its glow and flush; and thus day after day
     Dragged its slow length along, until, one morn,
     The breath of lilies, fainting on the air,
     Floated into my room, and then I longed once more
     To gaze upon the Nile, as on the face
     Of a familiar friend, whose absence long
     Had made a mournful void within the heart.
     I summoned to my side my maids, and bade
     Them place my sandals on my feet, and lead
     Me to the Nile, where I might bathe my weary
     Limbs within the cooling flood, and gather
     Healing from the sacred stream.
     I sought my favorite haunt, and, bathing, found
     New tides of vigor coursing through my veins.
     Refreshed, I sat me down to weave a crown of lotus leaves
     And lilies fair, and while I sat in a sweet
     Revery, dreaming of life and hope, I saw
     A little wicker-basket hidden among
     The flags and lilies of the Nile, and I called
     My maidens and said, “Nillias and Osiria
     Bring me that little ark which floats beside
     The stream.” They ran and brought me a precious burden.
     ’Twas an ark woven with rushes and daubed
     With slime, and in it lay a sleeping child;
     His little hand amid his clustering curls,
     And a bright flush upon his glowing cheek.
     He wakened with a smile, and reached out his hand
     To meet the welcome of the mother’s kiss,
     When strange faces met his gaze, and he drew back
     With a grieved, wondering look, while disappointment
     Shook the quivering lip that missed the mother’s
     Wonted kiss, and the babe lifted his voice and wept.
     Then my heart yearned towards him, and I resolved
     That I would brave my father’s wrath and save
     The child; but while I stood gazing upon
     His wondrous beauty, I saw beside me
     A Hebrew girl, her eyes bent on me
     With an eager, questioning look, and drawing
     Near, she timidly said, “shall I call a nurse?”
     I bade her go; she soon returned, and with her
     Came a woman of the Hebrew race, whose
     Sad, sweet, serious eyes seemed overflowing
     With a strange and sudden joy. I placed the babe
     Within her arms and said, “Nurse this child for me;”
     And the babe nestled there like one at home,
     While o’er the dimples of his face rippled
     The brightest, sweetest smiles, and I was well
     Content to leave him in her care; and well
     Did she perform her part. When many days had
     Passed she brought the child unto the palace;
     And one morning, while I sat toying with
     His curls and listening to the prattle of his
     Untrained lips, my father, proud and stately,
     Saw me bending o’er the child and said,
     “Charmian, whose child is this? who of my lords
     Calls himself father to this goodly child?
     He surely must be a happy man.”
               Then I said, “Father, he is mine. He is a
     Hebrew child that I have saved from death.” He
     Suddenly recoiled, as if an adder
     Had stung him, and said, “Charmian, take that
     Child hence. How darest thou bring a member
     Of that mean and servile race within my doors?
     Nay, rather let me send for Nechos, whose
     Ready sword shall rid me of his hateful presence.”
     Then kneeling at his feet, and catching
     Hold of his royal robes, I said, “Not so,
     Oh! honored father, he is mine; I snatched
     Him from the hungry jaws of death, and foiled
     The greedy crocodile of his prey; he has
     Eaten bread within thy palace walls, and thy
     Salt lies upon his fresh young lips; he has
     A claim upon thy mercy.”
                                 “Charmian,” he said
     “I have decreed that every man child of that
     Hated race shall die. The oracles have said
     The pyramids shall wane before their shadow,
     And from them a star shall rise whose light shall
     Spread over earth a baleful glow; and this is why
     I root them from the land; their strength is weakness
     To my throne. I shut them from the light lest they
     Bring darkness to my kingdom. Now, Charmian,
     Give me up the child, and let him die.”
     Then clasping the child closer to my heart,
     I said, “the pathway to his life is through my own;
     Around that life I throw my heart, a wall
     Of living, loving clay.” Dark as the thunder
     Clouds of distant lands became my father’s brow,
     And his eyes flashed with the fierce lightnings
     Of his wrath; but while I plead, with eager
     Eyes upturned, I saw a sudden change come
     Over him; his eyes beamed with unwonted
     Tenderness, and he said, “Charmian, arise,
     Thy prayer is granted; just then thy dead mother
     Came to thine eyes, and the light of Asenath
     Broke over thy face. Asenath was the light
     Of my home; the star that faded out too
     Suddenly from my dwelling, and left my life
     To darkness, grief and pain, and for her sake,
     Not thine, I’ll spare the child.” And thus I saved
     Thee twice—once from the angry sword and once
     From the devouring flood. Moses, thou art
     Doubly mine; as such I claimed thee then, as such
     I claim thee now. I’ve nursed no other child
     Upon my knee, and pressed upon no other
     Lips the sweetest kisses of my love, and now,
     With rash and careless hand, thou dost thrust aside that love.
     There was a painful silence, a silence
     So hushed and still that you might have almost
     Heard the hurried breathing of one and the quick
     Throbbing of the other’s heart: for Moses,
     He was slow of speech, but she was eloquent
     With words of tenderness and love, and had breathed
     Her full heart into her lips; but there was
     Firmness in the young man’s choice, and he beat back
     The opposition of her lips with the calm
     Grandeur of his will, and again he essayed to speak.


                     MOSES.

     Gracious lady, thou remembrest well
     The Hebrew nurse to whom thou gavest thy foundling.
     That woman was my mother: from her lips I
     Learned the grand traditions of our race that float.
     With all their weird and solemn beauty, around
     Our wrecked and blighted fortunes. How oft!
     With kindling eye and glowing cheek, forgetful
     Of the present pain, she would lead us through
     The distant past: the past, hallowed by deeds
     Of holy faith and lofty sacrifice.
     How she would tell us of Abraham,
     The father of our race, that he dwelt in Ur;
     Of the Chaldees, and when the Chaldean king
     Had called him to his sacrifice, that he
     Had turned from his dumb idols to the living
     God, and wandered out from kindred, home and race,
     Led by his faith in God alone; and she would
     Tell us,—(we were three,) my brother Aaron,
     The Hebrew girl thou sentest to call a nurse,
     And I, her last, her loved and precious child;
     She would tell us that one day our father
     Abraham heard a voice, bidding him offer
     Up in sacrifice the only son of his
     Beautiful and beloved Sarah; that the father’s
     Heart shrank not before the bitter test of faith,
     But he resolved to give his son to God
     As a burnt offering upon Moriah’s mount;
     That the uplifted knife glittered in the morning
     Sun, when, sweeter than the music of a thousand
     Harps, he heard a voice bidding him stay his hand,
     And spare the child; and how his faith, like gold
     Tried in the fiercest fire, shone brighter through
     Its fearful test. And then she would tell us
     Of a promise, handed down from sire to son,
     That God, the God our fathers loved and worshiped,
     Would break our chains, and bring to us a great
     Deliverance; that we should dwell in peace
     Beneath our vines and palms, our flocks and herds
     Increase, and joyful children crowd our streets;
     And then she would lift her eyes unto the far
     Off hills and tell us of the patriarchs
     Of our line, who sleep in distant graves within
     That promised land; and now I feel the hour
     Draws near which brings deliverance to our race.


                     PRINCESS.

     These are but the dreams of thy young fancy;
     I cannot comprehend thy choice. I have heard
     Of men who have waded through slaughter
     To a throne; of proud ambitions, struggles
     Fierce and wild for some imagined good; of men
     Who have even cut in twain the crimson threads
     That lay between them and a throne; but I
     Never heard of men resigning ease for toil,
     The splendor of a palace for the squalor
     Of a hut, and casting down a diadem
     To wear a servile badge.
                           Sadly she gazed
     Upon the fair young face lit with its lofty
     Faith and high resolves—the dark prophetic eyes
     Which seemed to look beyond the present pain
     Unto the future greatness of his race.
     As she stood before him in the warm
     Loveliness of her ripened womanhood,
     Her languid eyes glowed with unwonted fire,
     And the bright tropical blood sent its quick
     Flushes o’er the olive of her cheek, on which
     Still lay the lingering roses of her girlhood.
     Grief, wonder, and surprise flickered like shadows
     O’er her face as she stood slowly crushing
     With unconscious hand the golden tassels
     Of her crimson robe. She had known life only
     By its brightness, and could not comprehend
     The grandeur of the young man’s choice; but she
     Felt her admiration glow before the earnest
     Faith that tore their lives apart and led him
     To another destiny. She had hoped to see
     The crown of Egypt on his brow, the sacred
     Leopard skin adorn his shoulders, and his seat
     The throne of the proud Pharaoh’s; but now her
     Dream had faded out and left a bitter pang
     Of anguish in its stead. And thus they parted,
     She to brood in silence o’er her pain, and he
     To take his mission from the hands of God
     And lead his captive race to freedom.
     With silent lips but aching heart she bowed
     Her queenly head and let him pass, and he
     Went forth to share the fortune of his race,
     Esteeming that as better far than pleasures
     Bought by sin and gilded o’er with vice.
     And he had chosen well, for on his brow
     God poured the chrism of a holy work.
     And thus anointed he has stood a bright
     Ensample through the changing centuries of time




                              CHAPTER II.


         It was a great change from the splendor, light
         And pleasure of a palace to the lowly huts
         Of those who sighed because of cruel bondage.
                                     As he passed
         Into the outer courts of that proud palace,
         He paused a moment just to gaze upon
         The scenes ’mid which his early life had passed—
         The pleasant haunts amid the fairest flowers,—
         The fountains tossing on the air their silver spray,—
         The statues breathing music soft and low
         To greet the first faint flushes of the morn,—
         The obelisks that rose in lofty grandeur
         From their stony beds—the sphynxes gaunt and grim,
         With unsolved riddles on their lips—and all
         The bright creation’s painters art and sculptors
         Skill had gathered in those regal halls, where mirth
         And dance, and revelry, and song had chased
         With careless feet the bright and fleeting hours.
         He was leaving all; but no regrets came
         Like a shadow o’er his mind, for he had felt
         The quickening of a higher life, as if his
         Soul had wings and he were conscious of their growth;
         And yet there was a tender light in those
         Dark eyes which looked their parting on the scenes
         Of beauty, where his life had been a joyous
         Dream enchanted with delight; but he trampled
         On each vain regret as on a vanquished foe,
         And went forth a strong man, girded with lofty
         Purposes and earnest faith. He journeyed on
         Till palaces and domes and lofty fanes,
         And gorgeous temples faded from his sight,
         And the lowly homes of Goshen came in view.
         There he saw the women of his race kneading
         Their tale of bricks; the sons of Abraham
         Crouching beneath their heavy burdens. He saw
         The increasing pallor on his sisters cheek,
         The deepening shadows on his mother’s brow,
         The restless light that glowed in Aaron’s eye,
         As if a hidden fire were smouldering
         In his brain; and bending o’er his mother
         In a tender, loving way, he said, “Mother,
         I’ve come to share the fortunes of my race,—
         To dwell within these lowly huts,—to wear
         The badge of servitude and toil, and eat
         The bitter bread of penury and pain.”
         A sudden light beamed from his mother’s eye,
         And she said, “How’s this, my son? but yesterday
         Two Hebrews, journeying from On to Goshen,
         Told us they had passed the temple of the Sun
         But dared not enter, only they had heard
         That it was a great day in On; that thou hadst
         Forsworn thy kindred, tribe and race; hadst bowed
         Thy knee to Egypt’s vain and heathen worship,
         Hadst denied the God of Abraham, of Isaac,
         And of Jacob, and from henceforth wouldst
         Be engrafted in Pharaoh’s regal line,
         And be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter.
         When thy father Amram heard the cruel news
         He bowed his head upon his staff and wept.
         But I had stronger faith than that. By faith
         I hid thee when the bloody hands of Pharaoh
         Were searching ’mid our quivering heart strings
         Dooming our sons to death; by faith I wove
         The rushes of thine ark and laid thee ’mid
         The flags and lilies of the Nile, and saw
         The answer to that faith when Pharaoh’s daughter
         Placed thee in my arms, and bade me nurse the child
         For her; and by that faith sustained, I heard
         As idle words the cruel news that stabbed
         Thy father like a sword.”
         “The Hebrews did not hear aright; last week
         There was a great day in On, from Esoan’s gate
         Unto the mighty sea; the princes, lords
         And chamberlains of Egypt were assembled;
         The temple of the sun was opened. Isis
         And Osiris were unveiled before the people,
         Apis and Orus were crowned with flowers;
         Golden censers breathed their fragrance on the air;
         The sacrifice was smoking on the altar;
         The first fruits of the Nile lay on the tables
         Of the sun: the music rose in lofty swells,
         Then sank in cadences so soft and low
         Till all the air grew tremulous with rapture.
         The priests of On were there, with sacred palms
         Within their hands and lotus leaves upon their
         Brows; Pharaoh and his daughter sat waiting
         In their regal chairs; all were ready to hear
         Me bind my soul to Egypt, and to swear
         Allegiance to her gods. The priests of On
         Drew near to lay their hands upon my head
         And bid me swear, ‘Now, by Osiris, judge
         Of all the dead, and Isis, mother of us
         All,’ that henceforth I’d forswear my kindred,
         Tribe and race; would have no other gods
         Than those of Egypt; would be engrafted
         Into Pharaoh’s royal line, and be called
         The son of Pharaoh’s daughter. Then, mother
         Dear, I lived the past again. Again I sat
         Beside thee, my lips apart with childish
         Wonder, my eager eyes uplifted to thy
         Glowing face, and my young soul gathering
         Inspiration from thy words. Again I heard
         Thee tell the grand traditions of our race,
         The blessed hopes and glorious promises
         That weave their golden threads among the sombre
         Tissues of our lives, and shimmer still amid
         The gloom and shadows of our lot. Again
         I heard thee tell of Abraham, with his constant
         Faith and earnest trust in God, unto whom
         The promise came that in his seed should all
         The nations of the earth be blessed. Of Isaac
         Blessing with disappointed lips his first-born son,
         From whom the birthright had departed. Of Jacob,
         With his warm affections and his devious ways,
         Flying before the wrath of Esau; how he
         Slumbered in the wild, and saw amid his dreams
         A ladder reaching to the sky, on which God’s
         Angels did descend, and waking, with a solemn
         Awe o’ershadowing all, his soul exclaimed, ‘How
         Dreadful is this place. Lo! God is here, and I
         Knew it not.’ Of Joseph, once a mighty prince
         Within this land, who shrank in holy horror
         From the soft white hand that beckoned him to sin
         Whose heart, amid the pleasures, pomp and pride
         Of Egypt, was ever faithful to his race,
         And when his life was trembling on its frailest chord
         He turned his dying eyes to Canaan, and made
         His brethren swear that they would make his grave
         Among the patriarchs of his line, because
         Machpelah’s cave, where Abraham bowed before
         The sons of Heth, and bought a place to lay
         His loved and cherished dead, was dearer to his
         Dying heart than the proudest tomb amid
         The princely dead of Egypt.
             Then, like the angels, mother dear, who met
         Our father Jacob on his way, thy words
         Came back as messengers of light to guide
         My steps, and I refused to be called the son
         Of Pharaoh’s daughter. I saw the priests of On
         Grow pale with fear, an ashen terror creeping
         O’er the princess’ face, while Pharaoh’s brow grew
         Darker than the purple of his cloak. But I
         Endured, as seeing him who hides his face
         Behind the brightness of his glory.
         And thus I left the pomp and pride of Egypt
         To cast my lot among the people of my race.”




                    FLIGHT INTO MIDIAN.—CHAPTER III.


          The love of Moses for his race soon found
          A stern expression. Pharaoh was building
          A pyramid; ambitious, cold and proud,
          He scrupled not at means to gain his ends.
          When he feared the growing power of Israel
          He stained his hands in children’s blood, and held
          A carnival of death in Goshen; but now
          He wished to hand his name and memory
          Down unto the distant ages, and instead
          Of lading that memory with the precious
          Fragrance of the kindest deeds and words, he
          Essayed to write it out in stone, as cold
          And hard, and heartless as himself.
                                      And Israel was
          The fated race to whom the cruel tasks
          Were given. Day after day a cry of wrong
          And anguish, some dark deed of woe and crime,
          Came to the ear of Moses, and he said,
          “These reports are ever harrowing my soul;
          I will go unto the fields where Pharaoh’s
          Officers exact their labors, and see
          If these things be so—if they smite the feeble
          At their tasks, and goad the aged on to toils
          Beyond their strength—if neither age nor sex
          Is spared the cruel smiting of their rods.”
          And Moses went to see his brethren.
                                      ’Twas eventide,
          And the laborers were wending their way
          Unto their lowly huts. ’Twas a sad sight,—
          The young girls walked without the bounding steps
          Of youth, with faces prematurely old,
          As if the rosy hopes and sunny promises
          Of life had never flushed their cheeks with girlish
          Joy; and there were men whose faces seemed to say
          We bear our lot in hopeless pain, we’ve bent unto
          Our burdens until our shoulders fit them,
          And as slaves we crouch beneath our servitude
          And toil. But there were men whose souls were cast
          In firmer moulds, men with dark secretive eyes,
          Which seemed to say, to-day we bide our time,
          And hide our wrath in every nerve, and only
          Wait a fitting hour to strike the hands that press
          Us down. Then came the officers of Pharaoh;
          They trod as lords, their faces flushed with pride
          And insolence, watching the laborers
          Sadly wending their way from toil to rest.
          And Moses’ heart swelled with a mighty pain; sadly
          Musing, he sought a path that led him
          From the busy haunts of men. But even there
          The cruel wrong trod in his footsteps; he heard
          A heavy groan, then harsh and bitter words,
          And, looking back, he saw an officer
          Of Pharaoh smiting with rough and cruel hand
          An aged man. Then Moses’ wrath o’erflowed
          His lips, and every nerve did tremble
          With a sense of wrong, and bounding forth he
          Cried unto the smiter, “Stay thy hand; seest thou
          That aged man? His head is whiter than our
          Desert sands; his limbs refuse to do thy
          Bidding because thy cruel tasks have drained
          Away their strength.” The Egyptian raised his eyes
          With sudden wonder; who was this that dared dispute
          His power? Only a Hebrew youth. His
          Proud lip curved in scornful anger, and he
          Waved a menace with his hand, saying, “back
          To thy task base slave, nor dare resist the will
          Of Pharaoh.” Then Moses’ wrath o’erleaped the bounds
          Of prudence, and with a heavy blow he felled
          The smiter to the earth, and Israel had
          One tyrant less. Moses saw the mortal paleness
          Chase the flushes from the Egyptian’s face,
          The whitening lips that breathed no more defiance
          And the relaxing tension of the well knit limbs;
          And when he knew that he was dead, he hid
          Him in the sand and left him to his rest.
                            Another day Moses walked
          Abroad, and saw two brethren striving
          For mastery; and then his heart grew full
          Of tender pity. They were brethren, sharers
          Of a common wrong: should not their wrongs more
          Closely bind their hearts, and union, not division,
          Be their strength? And feeling thus, he said, “ye
          Are brethren, wherefore do ye strive together?”
          But they threw back his words in angry tones
          And asked if he had come to judge them, and would
          Mete to them the fate of the Egyptian?
          Then Moses knew the sand had failed to keep
          His secret, that his life no more was safe
          In Goshen, and he fled unto the deserts
          Of Arabia and became a shepherd
          For the priest of Midian.




                              CHAPTER IV.


                   Men grow strong in action, but in solitude
         Their thoughts are ripened. Like one who cuts away
         The bridge on which he has walked in safety
         To the other side, so Moses cut off all retreat
         To Pharaoh’s throne, and did choose the calling
         Most hateful to an Egyptian; he became
         A shepherd, and led his flocks and herds amid
         The solitudes and wilds of Midian, where he
         Nursed in silent loneliness his earnest faith
         In God and a constant love for kindred, tribe
         And race. Years stole o’er him, but they took
         No atom from his strength, nor laid one heavy weight
         Upon his shoulders. The down upon his face
         Had ripened to a heavy beard; the fire
         That glowed within his youthful eye had deepened
         To a calm and steady light, and yet his heart
         Was just as faithful to his race as when he had
         Stood in Pharaoh’s courts and bade farewell
         Unto his daughter.
         There was a look of patient waiting on his face,
         A calm, grand patience, like one who had lifted
         Up his eyes to God and seen, with meekened face,
         The wings of some great destiny o’ershadowing
         All his life with strange and solemn glory.
         But the hour came when he must pass from thought
         To action,—when the hope of many years
         Must reach its grand fruition, and Israel’s
         Great deliverance dawn. It happened thus:
         One day, as Moses led his flocks, he saw
         A fertile spot skirted by desert sands,—
         A pleasant place for flocks and herds to nip
         The tender grass and rest within its shady nooks;
         And as he paused and turned, he saw a bush with fire
         Aglow; from root to stem a lambent flame
         Sent up its jets and sprays of purest light,
         And yet the bush, with leaves uncrisped, uncurled,
         Was just as green and fresh as if the breath
         Of early spring were kissing every leaf.
         Then Moses said I’ll turn aside to see
         This sight, and as he turned he heard a voice
         Bidding him lay his sandals by, for Lo! he
         Stood on holy ground. Then Moses bowed his head
         Upon his staff and spread his mantle o’er
         His face, lest he should see the dreadful majesty
         Of God; and there, upon that lonely spot,
         By Horeb’s mount, his shrinking hands received
         The burden of his God, which bade him go
         To Egypt’s guilty king, and bid him let
         The oppressed go free.
                                   Commissioned thus
         He gathered up his flocks and herds and sought
         The tents of Jethro, and said “I pray thee
         Let me go and see if yet my kindred live;”
         And Jethro bade him go in peace, nor sought
         To throw himself across the purpose of his soul.
         Yet there was a tender parting in that home;
         There were moistened eyes, and quivering lips,
         And lingering claspings of the parting hand, as Jethro
         And his daughters stood within the light of that
         Clear morn, and gave to Moses and his wife
         And sons their holy wishes and their sad farewells.
         For he had been a son and brother in that home
         Since first with manly courtesy he had filled
         The empty pails of Reuel’s daughters, and found
         A shelter ’neath his tent when flying from
         The wrath of Pharaoh.
                                 They journeyed on,
         Moses, Zipporah and sons, she looking back
         With tender love upon the home she had left,
         With all its precious memories crowding round
         Her heart, and he with eager eyes tracking
         His path across the desert, longing once more
         To see the long-lost faces of his distant home,
         The loving eyes so wont to sun him with their
         Welcome, and the aged hands that laid upon
         His youthful head their parting blessing. They
         Journeyed on till morning’s flush and noonday
         Splendor glided into the softened, mellowed
         Light of eve, and the purple mists were deep’ning
         On the cliffs and hills, when Horeb, dual
         Crowned, arose before him; and there he met
         His brother Aaron, sent by God to be
         His spokesman and to bear him company
         To Pharaoh. Tender and joyous was their greeting
         They talked of home and friends until the lighter
         Ripple of their thoughts in deeper channels flowed;
         And then they talked of Israel’s bondage,
         And the great deliverance about to dawn
         Upon the fortunes of their race; and Moses
         Told him of the burning bush, and how the message
         Of his God was trembling on his lips. And thus
         They talked until the risen moon had veiled
         The mount in soft and silvery light; and then
         They rested until morn, and rising up, refreshed
         From sleep, pursued their way until they reached
         The land of Goshen, and gathered up the elders
         Of their race, and told them of the message
         Of their Father’s God. Then eager lips caught up
         The words of hope and passed the joyful “news
         Around, and all the people bowed their heads
         And lifted up their hearts in thankfulness
         To God.”
                                   That same day
         Moses sought an audience with the king. He found
         Him on his throne surrounded by the princes
         Of his court, who bowed in lowly homage
         At his feet. And Pharaoh heard with curving lip
         And flushing cheek the message of the Hebrew’s God,
         Then asked in cold and scornful tones, “Has
         Israel a God, and if so where has he dwelt
         For ages? As the highest priest of Egypt
         I have prayed to Isis, and the Nile has
         Overflowed her banks and filled the land
         With plenty, but these poor slaves have cried unto
         Their God, then crept in want and sorrow
         To their graves. Surely Mizraim’s God is strong
         And Israel’s is weak; then wherefore should
         I heed his voice, or at his bidding break
         A single yoke?” Thus reasoned that proud king,
         And turned a deafened ear unto the words
         Of Moses and his brother, and yet he felt
         Strangely awed before their presence, because
         They stood as men who felt the grandeur
         Of their mission, and thought not of themselves,
         But of their message.




                               CHAPTER V.


       On the next day Pharaoh called a council
       Of his mighty men, and before them laid
       The message of the brethren: then Amorphel,
       Keeper of the palace and nearest lord
       Unto the king, arose, and bending low
       Before the throne, craved leave to speak a word.
       Amorphel was a crafty, treacherous man,
       With oily lips well versed in flattery
       And courtly speech, a supple reed ready
       To bend before his royal master’s lightest
       Breath—Pharaoh’s willing tool. He said
       “Gracious king, thou has been too lenient
       With these slaves; light as their burdens are, they
       Fret and chafe beneath them. They are idle
       And the blood runs riot in their veins. Now
       If thou would’st have these people dwell in peace,
       Increase, I pray thee, their tasks and add unto
       Their burdens; if they faint beneath their added
       Tasks, they will have less time to plot sedition
       And revolt.”

       Then Rhadma, oldest lord in Pharaoh’s court,
       Arose. He was an aged man, whose white
       And heavy beard hung low upon his breast,
       Yet there was a hard cold glitter in his eye,
       And on his face a proud and evil look.
       He had been a servant to the former king,
       And wore his signet ring upon his hand.
       He said, “I know this Moses well. Fourscore
       Years ago Princess Charmian found him
       By the Nile and rescued him from death, and did
       Choose him as her son, and had him versed in all
       The mysteries and lore of Egypt. But blood
       Will tell, and this base slave, with servile blood
       Within his veins, would rather be a servant
       Than a prince, and so, with rude and reckless hand,
       He thrust aside the honors of our dear
       Departed king. Pharaoh was justly wroth,
       But for his daughter’s sake he let the trespass
       Pass. But one day this Moses slew an Egyptian
       In his wrath, and then the king did seek his life;
       But he fled, it is said, unto the deserts
       Of Arabia, and became a shepherd for the priest
       Of Midian. But now, instead of leading flocks
       And herds, he aspires to lead his captive race
       To freedom. These men mean mischief; sedition
       And revolt are in their plans. Decree, I pray thee,
       That these men shall gather their own straw
       And yet their tale of bricks shall be the same.”
       And these words pleased Pharaoh well, and all his
       Lords chimed in with one accord. And Pharaoh
       Wrote the stern decree and sent it unto Goshen—
       That the laborers should gather their own straw,
       And yet they should not ’minish of their tale of bricks
                           ’Twas a sad day in Goshen;
       The king’s decree hung like a gloomy pall
       Around their homes. The people fainted ’neath
       Their added tasks, then cried unto the king,
       That he would ease their burdens; but he hissed
       A taunt into their ears and said, “ye are
       Idle, and your minds are filled with vain
       And foolish thoughts; get you unto your tasks,
       And ye shall not ’minish of your tale of bricks.”
                       And then they turned their eyes
       Reproachfully on Moses and his brother,
       And laid the cruel blame upon their shoulders.
       ’Tis an old story now, but then ’twas new
       Unto the brethren,—how God’s anointed ones
       Must walk with bleeding feet the paths that turn
       To lines of living light; how hands that bring
       Salvation in their palms are pierced with cruel
       Nails, and lips that quiver first with some great truth
       Are steeped in bitterness and tears, and brows
       Now bright beneath the aureola of God,
       Have bent beneath the thorny crowns of earth.
                         There was hope for Israel,
       But they did not see the golden fringes
       Of their coming morn; they only saw the cold,
       Grey sky, and fainted ’neath the cheerless gloom.

       Moses sought again the presence of the king:
       And Pharaoh’s brow grew dark with wrath,
       And rising up in angry haste, he said,
       Defiantly, “If thy God be great, show
       Us some sign or token of his power.”
       Then Moses threw his rod upon the floor,
       And it trembled with a sign of life;
       The dark wood glowed, then changed into a thing
       Of glistening scales and golden rings, and green,
       And brown and purple stripes; a hissing, hateful
       Thing, that glared its fiery eye, and darting forth
       From Moses’ side, lay coiled and panting
       At the monarch’s feet. With wonder open-eyed
       The king gazed on the changed rod, then called
       For his magicians—wily men, well versed
       In sinful lore—and bade them do the same.
       And they, leagued with the powers of night, did
       Also change their rods to serpents; then Moses’
       Serpent darted forth, and with a startling hiss
       And angry gulp, he swallowed the living things
       That coiled along his path. And thus did Moses
       Show that Israel’s God had greater power
       Than those dark sons of night.
                             But not by this alone
       Did God his mighty power reveal: He changed
       Their waters; every fountain, well and pool
       Was red with blood, and lips, all parched with thirst,
       Shrank back in horror from the crimson draughts.
       And then the worshiped Nile grew full of life:
       Millions of frogs swarmed from the stream—they clogged
       The pathway of the priests and filled the sacred
       Fanes, and crowded into Pharaoh’s bed, and hopped
       Into his trays of bread, and slumbered in his
       Ovens and his pans.

       Then came another plague, of loathsome vermin;
       They were gray and creeping things, that made
       Their very clothes alive with dark and sombre
       Spots—things so loathsome in the land they did
       Suspend the service of the temple; for no priest
       Dared to lift his hand to any god with one
       Of these upon him. And then the sky grew
       Dark, as if a cloud were passing o’er its
       Changeless blue; a buzzing sound broke o’er
       The city, and the land was swarmed with flies.
       The murrain laid their cattle low; the hail
       Cut off the first fruits of the Nile; the locusts,
       With their hungry jaws, destroyed the later crops,
       And left the ground as brown and bare as if a fire
       Had scorched it through,
                                   Then angry blains
       And fiery boils did blur the flesh of man
       And beast; and then for three long days, nor saffron
       Tint, nor crimson flush, nor soft and silvery light
       Divided day from morn, nor told the passage
       Of the hours; men rose not from their seats, but sat
       In silent awe. That lengthened night lay like a burden
       On the air,—a darkness one might almost gather
       In his hand, it was so gross and thick. Then came
       The last dread plague—the death of the first-born.
                                   ’Twas midnight,
       And a startling shriek rose from each palace,
       Home and hut of Egypt, save the blood-besprinkled homes
       Of Goshen; the midnight seemed to shiver with a sense
       Of dread, as if the mystic angels wing
       Had chilled the very air with horror.
       Death! Death! was everywhere—in every home
       A corpse—in every heart a bitter woe.
       There were anxious fingerings for the pulse
       That ne’er would throb again, and eager listenings
       For some sound of life—a hurrying to and fro—
       Then burning kisses on the cold lips
       Of the dead, bitter partings, sad farewells,
       And mournful sobs and piercing shrieks,
       And deep and heavy groans throughout the length
       And breadth of Egypt. ’Twas the last dread plague,
       But it had snapped in twain the chains on which
       The rust of ages lay, and Israel was freed;
       Not only freed, but thrust in eager haste
       From out the land. Trembling men stood by, and longed
       To see them gather up their flocks and herds,
       And household goods, and leave the land; because they felt
       That death stood at their doors as long as Israel
       Lingered there; and they went forth in haste,
       To tread the paths of freedom.




                              CHAPTER VI.


       But Pharaoh was strangely blind, and turning
       From his first-born and his dead, with Egypt’s wail
       Scarce still upon his ear, he asked which way had
       Israel gone? They told him that they journeyed
       Towards the mighty sea, and were encamped
       Near Baalzephn.
       Then Pharaoh said, “the wilderness will hem them in,
       The mighty sea will roll its barriers in front,
       And with my chariots and my warlike men
       I’ll bring them back, or mete them out their graves.”
                           Then Pharaoh’s officers arose
       And gathered up the armies of the king
       And made his chariots ready for pursuit.
       With proud escutcheons blazoned to the sun,
       In his chariot of ivory, pearl and gold,
       Pharaoh rolled out of Egypt; and with him
       Rode his mighty men, their banners floating
       On the breeze, their spears and armor glittering
       In the morning light; and Israel saw,
       With fainting hearts, their old oppressors on their
       Track: then women wept in hopeless terror;
       Children hid their faces in their mothers’ robes,
       And strong men bowed their heads in agony and dread;
       And then a bitter, angry murmur rose,—
       “Were there no graves in Egypt, that thou hast
       Brought us here to die?”
       Then Moses lifted up his face, aglow
       With earnest faith in God, and bade their fainting hearts
       Be strong and they should his salvation see.
       “Stand still,” said Moses to the fearful throng
       Whose hearts were fainting in the wild, “Stand still.”
       Ah, that was Moses’ word, but higher and greater
       Came God’s watchword for the hour, and not for that
       Alone, but all the coming hours of time.
       “Speak ye unto the people and bid them
       Forward go; stretch thy hand across the waters
       And smite them with thy rod.” And Moses smote
       The restless sea; the waves stood up in heaps,
       Then lay as calm and still as lips that just
       Had tasted death. The secret-loving sea
       Laid bare her coral caves and iris-tinted
       Floor; that wall of flood which lined the people’s
       Way was God’s own wondrous masonry;
       The signal pillar sent to guide them through the wild
       Moved its dark shadow till it fronted Egypt’s
       Camp, but hung in fiery splendor, a light
       To Israel’s path. Madly rushed the hosts
       Of Pharaoh upon the people’s track, when
       The solemn truth broke on them—that God
       For Israel fought. With cheeks in terror
       Blenching, and eyes astart with fear, “let
       Us flee,” they cried, “from Israel, for their God
       Doth fight against us; he is battling on their side.”
       They had trusted in their chariots, but now
       That hope was vain; God had loosened every
       Axle and unfastened every wheel, and each
       Face did gather blackness and each heart stood still
       With fear, as the livid lightnings glittered
       And the thunder roared and muttered on the air,
       And they saw the dreadful ruin that shuddered
       O’er their heads, for the waves began to tremble
       And the wall of flood to bend. Then arose
       A cry of terror, baffled hate and hopeless dread,
       A gurgling sound of horror, as “the waves
       Came madly dashing, wildly crashing, seeking
       Out their place again,” and the flower and pride
       Of Egypt sank as lead within the sea
       Till the waves threw back their corpses cold and stark
       Upon the shore, and the song of Israel.
       Triumph was the requiem of their foes.
       Oh the grandeur of that triumph; up the cliffs
       And down the valleys, o’er the dark and restless
       Sea, rose the people’s shout of triumph, going
       Up in praise to God, and the very air
       Seemed joyous for the choral song of millions
       Throbbed upon its viewless wings.
       Then another song of triumph rose in accents
       Soft and clear; “’twas the voice of Moses’ sister
       Rising in the tide of song.” The warm blood
       Of her childhood seemed dancing in her veins;
       The roses of her girlhood were flushing
       On her cheek, and her eyes flashed out the splendor
       Of long departed days, for time itself seemed
       Pausing, and she lived the past again; again
       The Nile flowed by her; she was watching by the stream,
       A little ark of rushes where her baby brother lay;
       The tender tide of rapture swept o’er her soul again
       She had felt when Pharaoh’s daughter had claimed
       Him as her own, and her mother wept for joy
       Above her rescued son. Then again she saw
       Him choosing “’twixt Israel’s pain and sorrow
       And Egypt’s pomp and pride.” But now he stood
       Their leader triumphant on that shore, and loud
       She struck the cymbals as she led the Hebrew women
       In music, dance and song, as they shouted out
       Triumphs in sweet and glad refrains.


                             MIRIAM’S SONG.

        A wail in the palace, a wail in the hut,
          The midnight is shivering with dread,
        And Egypt wakes up with a shriek and a sob
          To mourn for her first-born and dead.

        In the morning glad voices greeted the light,
          As the Nile with its splendor was flushed;
        At midnight silence had melted their tones,
          And their music forever is hushed.

        In the morning the princes of palace and court
          To the heir of the kingdom bowed down;
        ’Tis midnight, pallid and stark in his shroud
          He dreams not of kingdom or crown.

        As a monument blasted and blighted by God,
          Through the ages proud Pharaoh shall stand,
        All seamed with the vengeance and scarred with the wrath
          That leaped from God’s terrible hand.




                              CHAPTER VII.


           They journeyed on from Zuphim’s sea until
           They reached the sacred mount and heard the solemn
           Decalogue. The mount was robed in blackness,—
           Heavy and deep the shadows lay; the thunder
           Crashed and roared upon the air; the lightning
           Leaped from crag to crag; God’s fearful splendor
           Flowed around, and Sinai quaked and shuddered
           To its base, and there did God proclaim
           Unto their listening ears, the great, the grand,
           The central and the primal truth of all
           The universe—the unity of God.
                                 Only one God,—
           This truth received into the world’s great life,
           Not as an idle dream nor a speculative thing,
           But as a living, vitalizing thought,
           Should bind us closer to our God and link us
           With our fellow man, the brothers and co-heirs
           With Christ, the elder brother of our race.
           Before this truth let every blade of war
           Grow dull, and slavery, cowering at the light,
           Skulk from the homes of men; instead
           Of war bring peace and freedom, love and joy,
           And light for man, instead of bondage, whips
           And chains. Only one God! the strongest hands
           Should help the weak who bend before the blasts
           Of life, because if God is only one
           Then we are the children of his mighty hand,
           And when we best serve man, we also serve
           Our God. Let haughty rulers learn that men
           Of humblest birth and lowliest lot have
           Rights as sacred and divine as theirs, and they
           Who fence in leagues of earth by bonds and claims
           And title deeds, forgetting land and water,
           Air and light are God’s own gifts and heritage
           For man—who throw their selfish lives between
           God’s sunshine and the shivering poor—
           Have never learned the wondrous depth, nor scaled
           The glorious height of this great central truth,
           Around which clusters all the holiest faiths
           Of earth. The thunder died upon the air,
           The lightning ceased its livid play, the smoke
           And darkness died away in clouds, as soft
           And fair as summer wreaths that lie around
           The setting sun, and Sinai stood a bare
           And rugged thing among the sacred scenes
           Of earth.




                             CHAPTER VIII.


         It was a weary thing to bear the burden
         Of that restless and rebellious race. With
         Sinai’s thunders almost crashing in their ears,
         They made a golden calf, and in the desert
         Spread an idol’s feast, and sung the merry songs
         They had heard when Mizraim’s songs bowed down before
         Their vain and heathen gods; and thus for many years
         Did Moses bear the evil manners of his race—
         Their angry murmurs, fierce regrets and strange
         Forgetfulness of God. Born slaves, they did not love
         The freedom of the wild more than their pots of flesh.
         And pleasant savory things once gathered
         From the gardens of the Nile.
         If slavery only laid its weight of chains
         Upon the weary, aching limbs, e’en then
         It were a curse; but when it frets through nerve
         And flesh and eats into the weary soul,
         Oh then it is a thing for every human
         Heart to loathe, and this was Israel’s fate,
         For when the chains were shaken from their limbs
         They failed to strike the impress from their souls
         While he who’d basked beneath the radiance
         Of a throne, ne’er turned regretful eyes upon
         The past, nor sighed to grasp again the pleasures
         Once resigned; but the saddest trial was
         To see the light and joy fade from their faces
         When the faithless spies spread through their camp
         Their ill report; and when the people wept
         In hopeless unbelief and turned their faces
         Egyptward, and asked a captain from their bands
         To lead them back where they might bind anew
         Their broken chains, when God arose and shut
         The gates of promise on their lives, and left
         Their bones to bleach beneath Arabia’s desert sands
         But though they slumbered in the wild, they died
         With broader freedom on their lips, and for their
         Little ones did God reserve the heritage
         So rudely thrust aside.




                    THE DEATH OF MOSES.—CHAPTER IX.


        His work was done; his blessing lay
        Like precious ointment on his people’s head,
        And God’s great peace was resting on his soul.
        His life had been a lengthened sacrifice,
        A thing of deep devotion to his race,
        Since first he turned his eyes on Egypt’s gild
        And glow, and clasped their fortunes in his hand
        And held them with a firm and constant grasp.
        But now his work was done; his charge was laid
        In Joshua’s hand, and men of younger blood
        Were destined to possess the land and pass
        Through Jordan to the other side. He too
        Had hoped to enter there—to tread the soil
        Made sacred by the memories of his
        Kindred dead, and rest till life’s calm close beneath
        The sheltering vines and stately palms of that
        Fair land; that hope had colored all his life’s
        Young dreams and sent its mellowed flushes o’er
        His later years; but God’s decree was otherwise.
        And so he bowed his meekened soul in calm
        Submission to the word, which bade him climb
        To Nebo’s highest peak, and view the pleasant land
        From Jordan’s swells unto the calmer ripples
        Of the tideless sea, then die with all its
        Loveliness in sight.
        As he passed from Moab’s grassy vale to climb
        The rugged mount, the people stood in mournful groups,
        Some, with quivering lips and tearful eyes,
        Reaching out unconscious hands, as if to stay
        His steps and keep him ever at their side, while
        Others gazed with reverent awe upon
        The calm and solemn beauty on his aged brow,
        The look of loving trust and lofty faith
        Still beaming from an eye that neither care
        Nor time had dimmed. As he passed upward, tender
        Blessings, earnest prayers and sad farewells rose
        On each wave of air, then died in one sweet
        Murmur of regretful love; and Moses stood
        Alone on Nebo’s mount.
                                      Alone! not one
        Of all that mighty throng who had trod with him
        In triumph through the parted flood was there.
        Aaron had died in Hor, with son and brother
        By his side; and Miriam too was gone.
        But kindred hands had made her grave, and Kadesh
        Held her dust. But he was all alone; nor wife
        Nor child was there to clasp in death his hand,
        And bind around their bleeding hearts the precious
        Parting words. And yet he was not all alone,
        For God’s great presence flowed around his path
        And stayed him in that solemn hour.

            He stood upon the highest peak of Nebo,
        And saw the Jordan chafing through its gorges,
        Its banks made bright by scarlet blooms
        And purple blossoms. The placid lakes
        And emerald meadows, the snowy crest
        Of distant mountains, the ancient rocks
        That dripped with honey, the hills all bathed
        In light and beauty; the shady groves
        And peaceful vistas, the vines opprest
        With purple riches, the fig trees fruit-crowned
        Green and golden, the pomegranates with crimson
        Blushes, the olives with their darker clusters,
        Rose before him like a vision, full of beauty
        And delight. Gazed he on the lovely landscape
        Till it faded from his view, and the wing
        Of death’s sweet angel hovered o’er the mountain’s
        Crest, and he heard his garments rustle through
        The watches of the night.
                          Then another, fairer, vision
        Broke upon his longing gaze; ’twas the land
        Of crystal fountains, love and beauty, joy
        And light, for the pearly gates flew open,
        And his ransomed soul went in. And when morning
        O’er the mountain fringed each crag and peak with light,
        Cold and lifeless lay the leader. God had touched
        His eyes with slumber, giving his beloved sleep.

                  Oh never on that mountain
                  Was seen a lovelier sight
                  Than the troupe of fair young angels
                  That gathered ’round the dead.
                  With gentle hands they bore him
                  That bright and shining train,
                  From Nebo’s lonely mountain
                  To sleep in Moab’s vale.
                  But they sung no mournful dirges
                  No solemn requiems said,
                  And the soft wave of their pinions
                  Made music as they trod.
                  But no one heard them passing,
                  None saw their chosen grave;
                  It was the angels secret
                  Where Moses should be laid.
                  And when the grave was finished
                  They trod with golden sandals
                  Above the sacred spot,
                  And the brightest, fairest flowers
                  Sprang up beneath their tread.
                  Nor broken turf, nor hillock
                  Did e’er reveal that grave,
                  And truthful lips have never said
                  We know where he is laid.




                      THE MISSION OF THE FLOWERS.


In a lovely garden, filled with fair and blooming flowers, stood a
beautiful rose tree. It was the centre of attraction, and won the
admiration of every eye; its beauteous flowers were sought to adorn the
bridal wreath and deck the funeral bier. It was a thing of joy and
beauty, and its earth mission was a blessing. Kind hands plucked its
flowers to gladden the chamber of sickness and adorn the prisoner’s
lonely cell. Young girls wore them ’mid their clustering curls, and
grave brows relaxed when they gazed upon their wondrous beauty. Now the
rose was very kind and generous hearted, and, seeing how much joy she
dispensed, wished that every flower could only be a rose, and like
herself have the privilege of giving joy to the children of men; and
while she thus mused, a bright and lovely spirit approached her and
said, “I know thy wishes and will grant thy desires. Thou shalt have
power to change every flower in the garden to thine own likeness. When
the soft winds come wooing thy fairest buds and flowers, thou shalt
breathe gently o’er thy sister plants, and beneath thy influence they
shall change to beautiful roses.” The rose tree bowed her head in silent
gratitude to the gentle being who had granted her this wondrous power.
All night the stars bent over her from their holy homes above, but she
scarcely heeded their vigils. The gentle dews nestled in her arms and
kissed the cheeks of her daughters; but she hardly noticed them;—she was
waiting for the soft airs to awaken and seek her charming abode. At
length the gentle airs greeted her, and she hailed them with a joyous
welcome, and then commenced her work of change. The first object that
met her vision was a tulip superbly arrayed in scarlet and gold. When
she was aware of the intention of her neighbor, her cheeks flamed with
anger, her eyes flashed indignantly, and she haughtily refused to change
her proud robes for the garb the rose tree had prepared for her; but she
could not resist the spell that was upon her, and she passively
permitted the garments of the rose to enfold her yielding limbs. The
verbenas saw the change that had fallen upon the tulip and dreading that
a similar fate awaited them, crept closely to the ground, and, while
tears gathered in their eyes, they felt a change pass through their
sensitive frames, and instead of gentle verbenas they were blushing
roses. She breathed upon the sleepy poppies; a deeper slumber fell upon
their senses, and when they awoke, they too had changed to bright and
beautiful roses. The heliotrope read her fate in the lot of her sisters,
and, bowing her fair head in silent sorrow, gracefully submitted to her
unwelcome destiny. The violets, whose mission was to herald the approach
of spring, were averse to losing their identity. “Surely,” said they,
“we have a mission as well as the rose;” but with heavy hearts they saw
themselves changed like their sister plants. The snow drop drew around
her her robes of virgin white; she would not willingly exchange them for
the most brilliant attire that ever decked a flower’s form; to her they
were the emblems of purity and innocence; but the rose tree breathed
upon her, and with a bitter sob she reluctantly consented to the change.
The dahlias lifted their heads proudly and defiantly; they dreaded the
change, but scorned submission; they loved the fading year, and wished
to spread around his dying couch their brightest, fairest flowers; but
vainly they struggled, the doom was upon them, and they could not
escape. A modest lily that grew near the rose tree shrank instinctively
from her; but it was in vain, and with tearful eyes and trembling limbs
she yielded, while a quiver of agony convulsed her frame. The marygolds
sighed submissively and made no remonstrance. The garden pinks grew
careless, and submitted without a murmur, while other flowers, less
fragrant or less fair, paled with sorrow or reddened with anger; but the
spell of the rose tree was upon them, and every flower was changed by
her power, and that once beautiful garden was overrun with roses; it had
become a perfect wilderness of roses; the garden had changed, but that
variety which had lent it so much beauty was gone, and men grew tired of
roses, for they were everywhere. The smallest violet peeping faintly
from its bed would have been welcome, the humblest primrose would have
been hailed with delight,—even a dandelion would have been a harbinger
of joy; and when the rose saw that the children of men were dissatisfied
with the change she had made, her heart grew sad within her, and she
wished the power had never been given her to change her sister plants to
roses, and tears came into her eyes as she mused, when suddenly a rough
wind shook her drooping form, and she opened her eyes and found that she
had only been dreaming. But an important lesson had been taught; she had
learned to respect the individuality of her sister flowers, and began to
see that they, as well as herself, had their own missions,—some to
gladden the eye with their loveliness and thrill the soul with delight;
some to transmit fragrance to the air; others to breathe a refining
influence upon the world; some had power to lull the aching brow and
soothe the weary heart and brain into forgetfulness; and of those whose
mission she did not understand, she wisely concluded there must be some
object in their creation, and resolved to be true to her own earth
mission, and lay her fairest buds and flowers upon the altars of love
and truth.




                          THE RAGGED STOCKING.


                Do you see this ragged stocking,
                  Here a rent and there a hole?
                Each thread of this little stocking
                  Is woven around my soul.

                Do you wish to hear my story?
                  Excuse me, the tears will start,
                For the sight of this ragged stocking
                  Stirs the fountains of my heart.

                You say that my home is happy;
                  To me ’tis earth’s fairest place,
                But its sunshine, peace and gladness
                  Back to this stocking I trace.

                I was once a wretched drunkard;
                  Ah! you start and say not so;
                But the dreadful depths I’ve sounded,
                  And I speak of what I know.

                I was wild and very reckless
                  When I stood on manhood’s brink,
                And, joining with pleasure-seekers
                  Learned to revel and drink.

                Strong drink is a raging demon,
                  In his hands are shame and woe;
                He mocketh the strength of the mighty
                  And bringeth the strong man low.

                The light of my home was darkened
                  By the shadow of my sin;
                And want and woe unbarr’d the door,
                  And suffering entered in.

                       ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

                The streets were full one Christmas eve,
                  And alive with girls and boys,
                Merrily looking through window-panes
                  At bright and beautiful toys.

                And throngs of parents came to buy
                  The gifts that children prize,
                And homeward trudged with happy hearts,
                  The love-light in their eyes.

                I thought of my little Charley
                  At home in his lowly bed,
                With the shadows around his life,
                  And in shame I bowed my head.

                I entered my home a sober man,
                  My heart by remorse was wrung,
                And there in the chimney corner,
                  This little stocking was hung.

                Faded and worn as you see it;
                  To me ’tis a precious thing,
                And I never gaze upon it
                  But unbidden tears will spring.

                I began to search my pockets,
                  But scarcely a dime was there;
                But scanty as was the pittance,
                  This stocking received its share.

                For a longing seized upon me
                  To gladden the heart of my boy,
                And I bought him some cakes and candy,
                  And added a simple toy.

                Then I knelt by this little stocking
                  And sobbed out an earnest prayer,
                And arose with strength to wrestle
                  And break from the tempter’s snare.

                And this faded, worn-out stocking,
                  So pitiful once to see,
                Became the wedge that broke my chain,
                  And a blessing brought to me.

                Do you marvel then I prize it?
                  When each darn and seam and hole
                Is linked with my soul’s deliverance
                  From the bondage of the bowl?

                And to-night my wife will tell you,
                  Though I’ve houses, gold and land,
                He holds no treasure more precious
                  Than this stocking in my hand.




                           THE FATAL PLEDGE.


               “Pledge me with wine,” the maiden cried,
                 Her tones were gay and light;
               “From others you have turned aside,
                 I claim your pledge to-night.”

               The blood rushed to the young man’s cheek
                 Then left it deadly pale;
               Beneath the witchery of her smile
                 He felt his courage fail.

               For many years he’d been a slave
                 To the enchanting bowl,
               Until he grasped with eager hands
                 The reins of self-control;

               And struggled with his hated thrall,
                 Until he rent his chain,
               And strove to stand erect and free,
                 And be a man again.

               When others came with tempting words
                 He coldly turned aside,
               But she who held the sparkling cup
                 Was his affianced bride;

               And like a vision of delight,
                 Bright, beautiful and fair,
               With thoughtless words she wove for him
                 The meshes of despair.

               From jeweled hands he took the cup,
                 Nor heard the serpent’s hiss;
               Nor saw beneath its ruby glow
                 The deadly adder’s hiss.

               Like waves that madly, wildly dash,
                 When dykes are overthrown,
               The barriers of his soul gave way,
                 Each life with wrecks was strewn.

               And she who might have reached her hand
                 To succor and to save,
               Soon wept in hopeless agony
                 Above a drunkard’s grave.

               And bore through life with bleeding heart
                 Remembrance of that night,
               When she had urged the tempted man
                 With wine to make his plight.




                     CHRIST’S ENTRY INTO JERUSALEM.


                 He had plunged into our sorrows,
                   And our sin had pierced his heart,
                 As before him loomed death’s shadow,
                   And he knew he must depart.

                 But they hailed him as a victor
                   As he into Salem came,
                 And the very children shouted
                   Loud hosannas to his name.

                 But he knew behind that triumph,
                   Rising gladly to the sky,
                 Soon would come the cries of malice:
                   Crucify him! Crucify!

                 Onward rode the blessed Saviour,
                   Conscious of the coming strife
                 Soon to break in storms of hatred
                   Round his dear, devoted life.

                 Ghastly in its fearful anguish
                   Rose the cross before his eyes,
                 But he saw the joy beyond it,
                   And did all the shame despise.

                 Joy to see the cry of scorning
                   Through the ages ever bright,
                 And the cross of shame transfigured
                   To a throne of love and light.

                 Joy to know his soul’s deep travail
                   Should not be a thing in vain,
                 And that joy and peace should blossom
                   From his agonizing pain.




                       THE RESURRECTION OF JESUS.


                It was done, the deed of horror;
                  Christ had died upon the cross,
                And within an upper chamber
                  The disciples mourned their loss.

                Peter’s eyes were full of anguish,
                  Thinking sadly of the trial
                When his boasted self-reliance
                  Ended in his Lord’s denial.

                Disappointment, deep and heavy,
                  Shrouded every heart with gloom,
                As the hopes so fondly cherished
                  Died around the garden tomb.

                And they thought with shame and sorrow
                  How they fled in that dark hour,
                When they saw their Lord and Master
                  In the clutch of Roman power.

                We had hoped, they sadly uttered,
                  He would over Israel reign,
                But to-day he lies sepulchred,
                  And our cherished hopes are vain.

                In the humble home of Mary
                  Slowly waned the hours away,
                Till she rose to seek the garden
                  And the place where Jesus lay.

                Not the cross with all its anguish
                  Could her loving heart restrain,
                But the tomb she sought was empty,
                  And her heart o’erflowed with pain.

                To embalm my Lord and Master
                  To this garden I have strayed,
                But, behold, I miss his body,
                  And I know not where he’s laid.

                Then a wave of strange emotion
                  Swept her soul, as angels said,
                “Wherefore do ye seek the living
                  ’Mid the chambers of the dead?”

                Unperceived, her Lord stood by her,
                  Silent witness of her grief,
                Bearing on his lips the tidings
                  Sure to bring a glad relief.

                But her tear-dimmed eyes were holden
                  When she heard the Master speak;
                Thought she, only ’tis the gardener
                  Asking whom her soul did seek.

                Then a sudden flush of gladness
                  O’er her grief-worn features spread;
                When she knew the voice of Jesus
                  All her bitter anguish fled.

                Forth she reached hands in rapture.
                  Touch me not, the Saviour said;
                Take the message to my brethren,
                  I have risen from the dead.

                Take them words of joy and comfort,
                  Which will all their mourning end;
                To their Father and my Father,
                  Tell them that I will ascend.

                “Brethren, I have seen the Master:
                  He is risen from the dead.”
                But like words of idle meaning
                  Seemed the glorious words she said.

                Soon they saw the revelation
                  Which would bid their mourning cease:
                Christ, the risen, stood before them
                  Breathing words of love and peace.

                Timid men were changed to heroes,
                  Weakness turned to wondrous might,
                And the cross became their standard,
                  Luminous with love and light.

                From that lonely upper chamber,
                  Holding up the rugged cross,
                With a glad and bold surrender
                  They encountered shame and loss.

                In these days of doubt and error,
                  In the conflict for the right,
                May our hearts be ever strengthened
                  By the resurrection’s might.




                          SIMON’S COUNTRYMEN.


              They took away his seamless robe,
                With thorns they crowned his head,
              As harshly, fiercely cried his foes:
                “Barabbas in his stead.”

              The friends he loved unto the end,
                Who shared his daily bread,
              Before the storms of wrath and hate
                Forsook their Lord and fled.

              To rescue men from death and sin
                He knew the awful cost,
              As wearily he bent beneath
                The burden of the cross.

              When Pilate had decreed his fate,
                And Jews withheld their aid,
              Then Simon, the Cyrenean, came:
                On him the cross was laid.

              Not his to smite with cruel scorn,
                Nor mock the dying one,
              That helpful man came from the land
                Kissed by the ardent sun—

              The land within whose sheltering arms
                The infant Jesus lay
              When Herod vainly bared his sword
                And sought the child to slay.

              Amid the calendar of saints
                We Simon’s name may trace,
              On history’s page thro’ every age
                He bears an honored place.

              He little knew that cross would change
                Unto a throne of light;
              The crown of thorns upon Christ’s brow
                Would be forever bright.

              Beneath the shadow of that cross
                Brave men with outstretched hands
              Have told the wondrous tale of love
                In distant heathen lands.

              And yet within our favored land,
                Where Christian churches rise,
              The dark-browed sons of Africa
                Are hated and despised.

              Can they who speak of Christ as King,
                And glory in his name,
              Forget that Simon’s countrymen
                Still bear a cross of shame?

              Can they forget the cruel scorn
                Men shower on a race
              Who treat the hues their Father gives
                As emblems of disgrace?

              Will they erect to God their fanes
                And Christ with honor crown,
              And then with cruel weights of pain
                The African press down?

              Oh, Christians, when we faint and bleed
                In this our native land,
              Reach out to us when peeled, opprest,
                A kindly helping hand,

              And bear aloft that sacred cross,
                Bright from the distant years,
              And say for Christ’s and Simon’s sake,
                We’ll wipe away your tears.

              For years of sorrow, toil and pain
                We’ll bring you love and light,
              And in the name of Christ our Lord
                We’ll make your pathway bright.

              That seamless robe shall yet enfold
                The children of the sun,
              Till rich and poor and bond and free
                In Christ shall all be one.

              And for his sake from pride and scorn
                Our spirits shall be free,
              Till through our souls shall sound the words
                He did it unto me.




                              DELIVERANCE.


                Rise up! rise up! Oh Israel,
                  Let a spotless lamb be slain;
                The angel of death will o’er you bend
                  And rend your galling chain.

                Sprinkle its blood upon the posts
                  And lintels of your door;
                When the angel sees the crimson spots
                  Unharmed he will pass you o’er.

                Gather your flocks and herds to-night,
                  Your children by your side:
                A leader from Arabia comes
                  To be your friend and guide.

                With girded loins and sandled feet
                  Await the hour of dread,
                When Mizraim shall wildly mourn
                  Her first-born and her dead.

                The sons of Abraham no more
                  Shall crouch ’neath Pharoah’s hand,
                Trembling with agony and dread,
                  He’ll thrust you from the land.

                And ye shall hold in unborn years
                  A feast to mark this day,
                When joyfully the fathers rose
                  And cast their chains away.

                When crimson tints of morning flush
                  The golden gates of day,
                Or gorgeous hue of even melt
                  In sombre shades away,

                Then ye shall to your children teach
                  The meaning of this feast,
                How from the proud oppressor’s hand
                  Their fathers were released,

                And ye shall hold through distant years
                  This feast with glad accord,
                And children’s children yet shall learn
                  To love and trust the Lord.

                Ages have passed since Israel trod
                  In triumph through the sea,
                And yet they hold in memory’s urn
                  Their first great jubilee.

                When Moses led the ransomed hosts,
                  And Miriam’s song arose,
                While ruin closed around the path
                  Of their pursuing foes.

                Shall Israel thro’ long varied years
                  These memories cherish yet,
                And we who lately stood redeemed
                  Our broken chains forget?

                Should we forget the wondrous change
                  That to our people came,
                When justice rose and sternly plead
                  Our cause with sword and flame?

                And led us through the storms of war
                  To freedom’s fairer shore,
                When slavery sank beneath a flood
                  Whose waves were human gore.

                Oh, youth and maidens of the land,
                  Rise up with one accord,
                And in the name of Christ go forth
                  To battle for the Lord.

                Go forth, but not in crimson fields,
                  With fratricidal strife,
                But in the name of Christ go forth
                  For freedom, love and life.

                Go forth to follow in his steps,
                  Who came not to destroy,
                Till wastes shall blossom as the rose,
                  And deserts sing for joy.




                             SIMON’S FEAST.


               He is coming, she said, to Simon’s feast,
                 The prophet of Galilee,
               Though multitudes around him throng
                 In longing his face to see.

               He enters the home as Simon’s guest,
                 But he gives no welcome kiss;
               He brings no water to bathe his feet—
                 Why is Simon so remiss?

               The prophet’s face is bright with love,
                 And mercy beams from his eye;
               He pities the poor, the lame and blind,
                 An outcast, I will draw nigh.

               If a prophet, he will surely know
                 The guilt of my darkened years;
               With broken heart I’ll seek his face,
                 And bathe his feet with my tears.

               No holy rabbi lays his hand
                 In blessing on my head;
               No loving voice floats o’er the path,
                 The downward path I tread.

               Unto the Master’s side she pressed,
                 A penitent, frail and fair,
               Rained on his feet a flood of tears,
                 And then wiped them with her hair.

               Over the face of Simon swept
                 An air of puzzled surprise;
               Can my guest a holy prophet be,
                 And not this woman despise?

               Christ saw the thoughts that Simon’s heart
                 Had written upon his face,
               Kindly turned to the sinful one
                 In her sorrow and disgrace.

               Where Simon only saw the stains,
                 Where sin and shame were rife,
               Christ looked beneath and saw the germs
                 Of a fair, outflowering life.

               Like one who breaks a galling chain,
                 And sets a prisoner free,
               He rent her fetters with the words,
                 “Thy sins are forgiven thee.”

               God be praised for the gracious words
                 Which came through that woman’s touch
               That souls redeemed thro’ God’s dear Son
                 May learn to love him so much;

               That souls once red with guilt and crime
                 May their crimson stains outgrow;
               The scarlet spots upon their lives
                 Become whiter than driven snow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 Page           Changed from                      Changed to

   28 The king’s degree hung like a    The king’s decree hung like a
      gloomy pall                      gloomy pall

 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74527 ***
